Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore, joined as always by my co-host, Kyle Helson, and I want to thank everybody for listening as always. I want to ask you, please subscribe to the podcast. I assume most of you have, so iTunes rating five stars is great. Share the podcast, of course. A lot of people sharing the last one. Really appreciate that. Also really appreciate 200,000 listens. We're also an ad-free podcast. Again, what did I say last time? A Buck a Show. Where did I get that? Tan Carlin, I think. Yeah, I think so. Yeah, so Buck a Show would be...
Fantastic at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. And we've got show notes up on the website if we have any references from this episode. We haven't planned it, so we're going to find out if we do indeed have those.
If you have any coaching or consultation inquiries, we're taking on athletes all the time. Even if my personal roster is full or somebody else's, we always have roster spots. So send an inquiry, empiricalcycling at gmail.com. Also, if you want to consult on your strength training or your endurance training or whatever it is, we'll sit down for a call and we'll go over things. So that's how that works. Always have time for that. So shoot me an email. Also on Instagram at empiricalcycling.
in case anybody was wondering about the last post if you want to go to empiricalcyclingpodcast.threadless.com we have some merch don't worry we don't actually make any money because it's threadless but there's a new design thanks to Kyle and the joke is that I like metal that where the band logo is illegible because it looks like tree branches and so Kyle made a funny logo for us for that so if you want one of those check that out
And so going along with our 10-Minute Tips series on strength training, we're going to go over periodization today. And as usual, we have very little prepared. So Kyle, why don't I toss it over to you for some preamble on periodization for strength training. Yeah. So we've mentioned this at least a couple times in previous quote-unquote 10-Minute Tips about strength training.
But if you go onto the internet and just queue up some sort of beginner-oriented strength training program, typically they operate in one of two ways. One way is it's designed around someone being in some sort of competitive strength sport or sport like a team sport where actually gaining muscle mass and putting on size is beneficial or usually seen as beneficial. So typically you'll start with some sort of...
Intro Adaptation Phase just to get used to lifting and maybe get used to the movements and then move into a hypertrophy phase before doing strength and then maybe peaking strength or speed or something like that depending on what your ultimate goal is for sports or there are especially over the last I would say 15 years a lot of these beginner oriented strength
Focused programs have become really popular, like strong lifts or starting strength, and those skip the hypertrophy introductory phase altogether and just have you, after getting used to the movements, dive straight into doing sets of five primarily based around foundational strength until you can more or less exhaust your noob gains.
There are lots of people who will just be like, well, let me see what Reddit says or something like that. And those are the programs where the options get tossed around a lot. Yeah, like a real lot. And you won't, a lot of the time, especially if you're kind of new to strength training, you usually won't do yourself any disservice with this kind of thing. A lot of what people are looking for are usually health.
So you're looking for greater bone density from the external loading or you are looking for a little more muscle mass or you're looking for some muscle tone or something like that. Maybe you want to improve your sprint or maybe you want to improve your anaerobic capacity. Muscle mass is really helpful for this kind of thing.
Gone into the gym before to do a bunch of squats, then you're going to find no matter what for a little while, everything is going to make you stronger and it's going to translate pretty well to the bike. When the noob gains kind of stop, actually, you know what? That's one of the things that I wanted to discuss today is the periodization aspect with regards to when you kind of tap out on those noob gains because I think a lot of the time for most people's typical programming
By the time you have to back the weights off and focus on aerobic stuff, you have not actually tapped out your noob gains. Maybe after a couple years of this, you may have, but usually I think after like maybe two, three months, it's probably not going to happen. I don't know. What do you think, Kyle? Yeah, I think a lot of times in the very, very new lifter oriented
Linear Periodization Programs. They say you've tapped out your noob gains when you're no longer able to basically add five pounds to your working weight every time you end up going to the gym. And those programs are often sending people to the gym three to four times a week. Usually it's like every other day. So that kind of work or, you know, a Monday, Tuesday and a Thursday, Friday or something like that. Anyway.
After you're no longer allowed to keep progressing at that pretty rapid rate, if you're adding like 5 pounds or 10 pounds every time, they say you've exhausted your new gains and you should look to a more intermediate-focused program. But for some people, that might take them from squatting nothing but the empty bar up to like a 300-pound squat. And so that could be months of adding 5 to 10 pounds a workout.
where your only focus is on strength. And so those people are going to the gym much more often than you would if you're going to be working on the bike as well. Yeah. And depending on your goal in the gym, you may or may not want to deviate from these typical strength improvement programs that go beyond the new gains, starting strength type stuff. And that's one of the things that...
I've got on the docket to discuss today. So why don't we back it up a little bit and let's figure out. So we've already kind of talked about exercise selection, bilateral and unilateral stuff. We've talked about sets and reps. I'm trying a blank there.
We've also talked about just kind of getting into the gym, really, really intro stuff. And so today, let's think about periodization, because we've kind of mentioned this in the sets and reps episode, where it was talking about higher reps that you want to kind of do first, and then you move into this, that, and the other thing. So let's talk about the adaptation phase. So Kyle, after you've been out of the gym for a little while, what is that first time back or two? How does that feel?
Well, it depends on how kind of attitude you take. But for a lot of people, it feels terrible. And they realize that, especially if they haven't been lifting during season, not only are they going to be very sore just from the delayed onset muscle soreness the next day, but they're also going to find that they're having to get down into positions that maybe they haven't.
Benin in a while or they haven't had to exert a lot of forcing in a while like the bottom of a squat or a deadlift or something like that or they're finding that maybe their shoulders or elbows or wrists or something get a little beat up because they're not used to having to hold a bar on their back and then get their shoulders and their wrists back in that position like a like a back squat and so for a multitude of reasons it's fine to not dive head in head first into
heavy sets of five or something crazy like that because you're going to be really sore and if you are trying to do anything else other than lift, it's going to basically make it impossible for the next two days because a lot of people here may be familiar with this. You think the soreness is bad 24 hours after, but a lot of times really bad soreness peaks 48 hours. So normally when you think, oh, I've had a day off, I should be in the clear.
It's actually worse and you really can't walk and you hobble around like an idiot or you can't sit on the toilet or something. Yeah, that's why my desk chair is extremely padded. I'm just kidding. But it's nice. Not that I'm getting back into the gym that often. Actually, once or twice a year. But when you...
do go to do these things. So typically lightweight, higher rep range. So not the highest, like not like 20, 30 as bodybuilding programs would typically have you do for like main sets, but just for technique. So eight to 12 reps is a good adaptation range. The first time back, you wanna make sure you do deep, deep squats, get your technique really good, and maybe add just a tiny little bit of load.
Just the bar is not enough weight to challenge somebody's balance. So you can actually get the bar either forward or backwards of your proper midfoot where the balance should be. And you don't have any kind of anti to balance. And a little bit of load can help you with that. And then RPE range, maybe like a four to five. Max six for like your last set of whatever rep range you're doing.
Yeah definitely and it should like never at any point during this time should you be worried about finishing or should you feel weird aches and pains like it's fine if you feel a little bit stiff or if you feel a little bit like you are being kind of stretched or pushed into a position you haven't been into a while been in in a while but it should not feel acutely painful no it should not
Hopefully, yeah. And because I always like to do the stupidest thing possible whenever I get back into the gym, I usually try to find that load where if I do a couple reps at it, I feel like my quads are going to snap. And usually that's where I can do one rep and at the bottom I'm going, oh my God, this hurts so bad. And then I rack it and I'm done.
just to kind of see where that point is and how to describe to people how to not find that point. Like you get there and then you think back and it's like, oh, okay, so what I did before, that is the appropriate range and now I know how to coach this properly. So that's my approach anyway, to always do the stupidest thing possible for me. Yeah, and I think honestly,
We kind of joke about this sometimes, but as someone who is going to be, like as a coach prescribing these things, it can be very, very informative and insightful if you have done the mistakes. Instead of just telling people, oh, you shouldn't do this because of X, Y, and Z, you can say, you really shouldn't do this because the experience is terrible. And I know because I've done that. So yeah, I also think that
This time, it doesn't have to be just one or two times in the gym. If it takes you a couple weeks because you're only lifting twice a week, that's fine. If it takes you effectively four-ish, five-ish times back in the gym before you no longer get that crippling soreness and that kind of uncoordinated, oh no, I don't remember what I'm exactly doing here feeling. And that's fine. Yeah. And I do find that typically...
four to five times back in the gym with slightly increasing loads each time. It should feel about the same, but the weight's going up or the reps are going out either way. That's about when the soreness kind of stops until you get back in the gym and you do one of those epic, I did all the reps, I felt really good, I did extra everything. Then you go home and then you sit down on the toilet and it's like...
Oh yeah, that's what soreness is like. Or you're like under fueled a lot of the time. That can actually lead to a good deal of soreness. If you're stressed out, if you're underfed, under fueled, and a lot of times just eating a little more if the soreness perpetuates can help with that recovery a lot. Yeah, I have a friend and I won't name names, but for a while he was getting back into lifting.
and he was complaining to me that he felt like he had been lifting pretty regularly for a couple months or something like that and had still had a lot of soreness like crippling soreness every time he went into the gym and did squats or something. I asked him I was like what are you what are you eating after you go to the gym and he's like oh you know I have like a Clif Bar or something like that and I was like how much
How much protein are you eating after you go to the gym? Yeah, Cliff Bar is like, what, 10 grams or something like that? Yeah, and you're like, yeah, the Cliff Bar is great maybe before you go to the gym, but after you go to the gym, if you are finding that you are still quite sore, you may want to check in on how much protein you are consuming after going to the gym, or all the time. Like, a good rule of thumb that people will say is something like, try to eat 20 grams of protein every...
four hours, give or take. Or, you know, however much you need for your body mass. Yeah. But that being said, the soreness should not be crippling for months and months and months and months unless you're like prime Dorian Yates and you're just going in and slaughtering yourself every leg day. God. Yeah, don't do that. And also carbohydrates after these sessions should be noted before we push on here.
where like for my sessions typically afterwards I'll have anywhere between 70 to 100 grams afterwards and then my next couple meals will be 60 to 90 grams usually depending on how hard I worked and how tired I am feeling so it can actually be a quite a large amount of food that you might need and you know you might think you don't need quite so much because if you put a bar tracker on and let the bar tracker
Calculate loads and do some physics. The kilojoule load is not that high. I think, Kyle, the highest kilojoule load I've ever seen from you in a lifting session is maybe 100 kilojoules? Yeah, that sounds right. I think if you just do the math of how much work did I do just moving weight from top to bottom to top or from each rep,
It's actually not that much work, but I think you are not really thinking about the fact that all the other time when you're in the gym, yes, you are sitting down a lot of the times, but you are not sleeping. Your heart rate is not 45 in between sets. And there is a lot of walking. Like you naturally do a lot of walking at the gym. Like I have a little step tracker and I'll, after my day, regular day.
Yeah. Yeah.
Typically, for everyone, after the adaptation phase, we move into the kind of a hypertrophy phase. And typically, if you're going to spend two to two and a half, maybe up to three months in the gym working out once or twice a week, I would...
Guess that you're probably not going to spend much more than three, maybe four weeks on the outside in this phase, which is really not enough time to do any kind of proper bodybuilding hypertrophy. I gained two pounds of muscle mass in this phase, and now I need to maintain it while I cut down to 1% body fat. There's none of that. No one accidentally looks like...
or Mr. Olympia on stage or something because they happen to do a little bit of hypertrophy work. Just like no one happens to win a tour because they just started riding their bike to work or something like that. Yeah, a lot of the time what happens is you gain muscle mass, quote unquote muscle mass, well technically it is because it's in the muscle, just by the glycogen storage of the large motor units which typically don't get used that much and suddenly you're taxing them and now they've got to
will store fuel because they're getting used properly. And this is one of the things that happens. And if you look under a microscope,
And oftentimes, I think I've said this on the podcast before, but if I haven't, the dirty secret of muscle hypertrophy is literally anything that grows the muscle counts as muscle hypertrophy. And so if you are super glycogen depleted, that counts as atrophy because if you look under a microscope, the same muscle fibers will be smaller. And then if you glycogen load and you do some high-wrap training, they'll get bigger. And even if you don't build any more contractile units,
that counts as hypertrophy. And so that kind of thing can go away too. And, you know, things like creatine supplementing, which I don't necessarily recommend for people, endurance athletes, you know, that'll add water weight too. Does that kind of make sense? Yeah. And honestly, even if you are doing a bodybuilding style, heavy hypertrophy,
plan or something like that, you're going to be hard pressed to put on more than like half a percent, one percent of body weight a week. And that's not going to be, I mean, that's assuming that you don't just eat unlimited McDonald's all the time. Yeah. The energy availability that you have helps determine how much muscle mass you're going to.
you're going to gain. Because if you watch what bodybuilders do, they eat so much when they're trying to gain muscle, like to the point where they have a hard time finishing it. Yeah. And so realistically, if you do this for a month, you're not going to gain five pounds even of muscle, even if you are just slaughtering yourself in the gym. Yeah. And usually if you'd see any, any kind of weight gain like this, a lot of it's just, it's, it's not real.
quote unquote real weight gain. So we'll talk about it with the nutritionist on a future episode. I keep promising that. I swear to God it'll happen soon. And so I think for people who are afraid of watts per kilogram and gaining more weight, I would say unless you are way, way, way, way overdoing it, you shouldn't be afraid of something that maybe looks like a hypertrophy phase. And actually, depending on the rider you are, that may actually be helpful.
Yeah, one of the things that I'm doing with several athletes right now is trying to gain some muscle mass so they can have better this, that, and the other thing, better sprints or better mountain bike starts or cyclocross starts or anaerobic capacity or what have you. This is one of the goals that we have. And so we are going to be doing...
this kind of training a little more than might be typical. And so you can actually adjust this phase as you see fit. And usually one of the things that's nice about this is it goes really well. Like you're pairing wine with a meal, you might pair this with some low intensity riding. Yeah. And especially because if you're doing a lot in the gym, low intensity riding is the only thing that you're going to be able to feel like you can do well. And honestly,
If it's the winter and it's the off season where you live, I realize in Australia and Southern Hemisphere countries, it may not be the winter there, but have fun, low intensity rides with your friends, that sounds great. Yeah, well, it is great. So, yeah, and so when you're thinking about periodizing this kind of stuff, this is usually, well, between the hypertrophy stuff and the strength strength training that we're going to talk about in a second.
These two phases of strength training have the largest amount of fatigue is what I find. And so this is where you want to make sure that if you do have anything else going on on the bike that the recovery from the lifting is actually not going to impact you that much. And so this might take...
Quite a bit of trial and error to figure out, oh, I recover from this lifting session in two days or three days or even four days. And that can help inform you how much can you do on the bike and how long you need to kind of chill in between. Yeah. And this is where you don't really want to just take a higher volume, long, slow endurance base plan and just pepper in strength workouts on top of it.
because it might work for you or it could go really badly, really quickly. Yeah, if you're doing sweet spot three, four, five times a week and you're also lifting three times a week, this is a very taxing schedule if you can do it. My hat is off and let me know because that's amazing and I want to know your recovery techniques. And, you know, otherwise...
always kind of be erring on the side of caution. And, you know, we'll talk about aerobic periodization another time, but for now it's tangential and it matters. So as we transition out of the, you know, kind of hypertrophy phase into the more strength phase, so we're going to go from sets and reps of, you know, three to five sets of
8 to 15-ish reps, maybe 20 on some very light exercises like muscle isolation exercises we talked about last time. And then you're going to get more into the four to six rep range of at least one exercise, if not two. And if you're going to do a third exercise, then you could bring it down to bring the weight down and the reps up. But this would be my suggestion for...
maybe another three to four weeks in this range. But this is where knowing your aerobic periodization matters. Because again, if you're going to start doing some threshold work or you're going to start doing some hard tempo or whatever work on the bike, this may not fit that well with your aerobic periodization. Yeah. And also keep in mind, you want to actually have
and this all laid out hopefully at the same time, like you said, when you're laying out what your on-the-bike work is and you're not developing an on-the-bike thing and going, oh crap, I should go to the gym and then like on the fly adjusting how your gym is. Not to say that you shouldn't prioritize maybe the on-the-bike work over killing yourself in the gym, but a little bit of forethought would go a long way here. Oh, it goes a very, very long way.
and reach out for consultation if you're not sure on if your programming is right for you, empiricalcycling at gmail.com. So I'm doing a better job plugging that, aren't I? Well, so after, well, do we have any more thoughts on the more or less maximal strength phase here? Well, so this should be, I guess, okay, depending on when you start, right? Now you've done
So you took two weeks to get into it and you've done four weeks of hypertrophy, maybe three actually hard weeks and then a week of deload and then three hard weeks of strength and then a week of deload. Now you're going to actually probably be looking at a...
Getting into those more build phases because now it might actually be January of the next year and you're looking at, okay, now races are at least in this calendar year and they're getting a little closer. So you're obviously not going to want to be destroying yourself in the gym if you actually have to start doing threshold, sweet spot, VO2s, something like that. Even on the bike sprint workouts, sometimes if they're not far enough away from gym work, they don't go well.
As we have found trying to, you know, you and me trying to do double days of bike work and gym work, you know, sometimes it goes really well, sometimes it goes very badly. And that's one of the things that, you know, we found in the pandemic when, you know, there was not much work going on. We could just ride our bikes and lift all day. That, you know, being rested is really crucial for a lot of this kind of stuff. And I think...
I think we talked about it in one of the more recent podcasts. Actually, I think it was the 200K episode where I think I said something like lifting is great because you have a very binary success slash failure kind of thing. Yes, correct. And this goes especially for lifting and the bike stuff incorporated because you can kind of slog through a bike workout and just kind of suck at it.
and hate it, hate every pedal stroke, but you can kind of do it. But if you were under the bar, you would be getting crushed. You'd be like, you would be getting pinned every single rev. You'd be like, I'm going to try it again. I'm going to try it again. I can do it. I can do it. Mine over matter. And then you get, you know, you fail another lift and it's like, we don't have that on the bike.
And so this is kind of the beauty of lifting is it really shows you the recovery that's necessary. Because if you go in and you do three to five heavy sets of five to like an eight out of 10 RPE and you're starting to get up into the nine, nine and a half for the last set. It's sort of like getting close to your TTE doing threshold work.
You know, if you get up to like the last five minutes where it starts getting hard and you're starting to have to kind of dig, but it's accomplishable. If you try to add more on top of that, is that going to be effective? The question is, if this were lifting, if you got under the bar and tried to do another set, would you be able to do it or would you hurt yourself? I think I have definitely felt that. I know that I have done
done things where I'm like, oh, I have one more set and I feel pretty tired, but I think I can do it. And then that's the time, that's the set that you tweak something in your back or your hip or something. And then for the next two, three weeks, maybe a month, you're like, oh yeah, my back doesn't feel great. I definitely did this in 2018. 2018? One of these, something like that.
Yeah, I tweaked my back in doing squats and I did it and it was weird because it wasn't that, it did not feel that bad at the time but I basically pulled like a QL muscle right above my right hip but then it would get better and it wouldn't feel that bad and then I would go out and do a sprint workout on the bike and after a few reps of sprints I would feel that QL muscle
Twinge, and you're like, oh, that sucks. So definitely, from personal experience, erring on the side of, I could do this one more time, but maybe I'm not going to. Especially when you have hard bike work is crucial. Yeah, and as you get deeper into a training block, you mentioned deloading, and we haven't really explicitly talked about that, I think, in this series. Right, yeah, we have not.
So that's just a fancy way of saying a rest week in the gym, where you are literally lifting with much lighter loads. So typically if you're not lifting that heavy, you can actually cut the rep range in half. So these are the two ways to do a quote unquote rest day in the gym.
where you either cut the reps in half or you cut the load in half and do your typical session. But I'd say for most people, cutting the load in half is probably a little more beneficial because like Kyle, you're squatting like 400 pounds now. And if I asked you to go into the gym and squat 400 pounds times two as a deload, like your knees would still be like, man, do we have to right now? Yeah, yeah, totally. And the funny thing is,
It almost creeps up on you, for me at least, with knee pain or with other things with lifting where it's like any other fatigue where you just had a good rest week, you feel great, and then as the weeks go on, as you start creeping in, a little bit more fatigue, a little bit more fatigue. And for lifting, because if it is connective tissue related like ligaments or tendons or things like that, they get way less blood flow and tend to recover.
Not nearly as quickly as muscle fibers do. Yeah, it's the squeezing, like a sponge that actually gets nutrient exchange. And so being active certainly seems to help a lot. Consult your PT for that kind of thing. If you are experiencing such pain, of course. So we're kind of getting off topic, but so let's right this ship. Yeah. So when it comes to...
The hypertension, hypertension, and typical strength phases. For a lot of people, this is all you need in the gym. This is a really good winter of lifting weights, and especially depending on when you need to be in shape for your spring or summer racing, then you may or may not want to get into these next phases that we're going to talk about. Why don't we talk about maintenance first, actually? Yeah.
Because this is where most people are going to want to go. And they're also going to want to know, how do I really maintain my strength in season? And the first recommendation I have is eat enough protein. This is a really easy way to tell your body, don't worry, we have all the ingredients we need to maintain muscle mass. Because honestly, muscle mass is one of your body's biggest reservoirs of protein. And if you need other things...
to stay alive, to function things like your kidneys and your liver and your brain and silly things like that. Muscle is such a big reservoir. That's one of the things that will take a backseat to more critical organ systems. Totally. And your body wants to be relatively efficient. It's not going to lug around extra muscle mass if it feels like that is
going to cost you other much more vital organs. Yeah. And I think also even more today with popular health topics and things like that, I think the importance of protein has been highlighted greatly where now you see everything is advertised as being high protein or containing more protein or whatever. Like you can get pasta now that is high protein, which is a little strange to me, but it's fine. So hopefully...
Nowadays it's a little bit easier and you don't always have to resort to choking down maybe questionable tasting protein shakes and stuff like that. Which I totally admit that protein shakes and other supplements like that are very convenient and when you're on the go, you have a busy life, whatever you have other shit you got to do. Supplements, totally a great way to go just because it makes it easier even if it is a little bit costlier. But yeah, making sure that you're actually eating.
actual protein sources is a great first step. Yeah. Actual food is a good way to go. But like you were saying, it's a good way to maintain muscle mass through a season. And that's one of the reasons why typical diet plans for weight loss in cycling will have what seems extremely high protein requirements. I know about half of the people I see trying to lose weight are
probably not eating enough protein. When I tell them, oh, you should eat this much, and they go, what? That's like impossible to get. How do I get that much protein? Other people are already eating that much protein, and that's fantastic. So if you want a nutritionist consultation, reach out to me, and I can hook you up with that. Yeah. I would also say for your lifting and season, I think it's become more popular, and maybe this is just because of social media and things like that, but I think people are...
more open about advertising or showing on social media that they are still lifting even if it's not twice a week even if it's just a few times a month during the race season I think back to Alex Dowsett just before his hour record
Like a month, even a month before that, he was still showing vlogs of him going to the gym and doing things like that. And even though it was like in the middle of a European like world tour road racing season. Yeah. Although that may, may or may not be recommended. One of the things that I typically would have people do for maintenance is either.
Sunday after their long ride. This is how easy maintenance should be. You can be tired from riding for five, six hours and still get into the gym and have good technique on these lifts because this is how light the lows need to be. All you have to do is get a little bit into the six to seven out of 10 RPE range, and that's going to be...
Excellent. Typically having people with 60 to 70% of their one rep max. So if you're doing sets of five and let's call that 85%, maybe even 80%, dropping that down another 10 to 15% and doing sets of five to eight should be very doable and will usually be enough to maintain muscle mass, but also...
I find that people who have little back issues if they're not lifting, or one of my clients goes to the gym and he climbs frequently, and when he doesn't, his back starts to tweak out a little bit, and the lifting isn't enough to help him per se, but a lot of people, this is something that really seems to help with the core strength and activating shoulders and all that kind of stuff.
So doing two sets of 5 to 10-ish at a 6 to 7 out of 10 RPE is good for maintenance and doing a little bit of single leg stuff. And it should be entirely technique focused. You're not really going, oh, man, I hope I can get this rep up because it should not be anything like that. Yeah, it's almost like doing openers, right, where you want to do it.
to the point of feeling good and where your body remembers like, oh yeah, this is how you do this. But it should not be stressful and it should not be fatiguing really. Yeah, because I think one of the things I see a lot of people doing when they go for maintenance is they go to the gym twice a week and they're lifting as heavy as they had previously. Yeah, definitely.
That seems like if you're racing like every other weekend or something like that, that seems like that could be a problem because then you just run out of space to fit in good work. If your body has a maximum amount of stuff from which it can recover and you are, you know, maybe it's sustainable for a brief period of time, but it does not seem like a good plan to be able to survive a summer of racing. Yeah.
Everybody's a little bit different with this stuff too. So you sometimes may want to lift a little heavier if you're feeling good and sometimes maybe not because this is one of the things that a lot of people I find who come to me for coaching or a consultation is they want to know how do I stay fit during the year, during the race season. And if you've got a really busy race season, a lot of it's just focused on recovery.
If you get a chance to feel good and, you know, the maintenance lifting is going okay, like I would say once a week, maybe every two weeks is probably fine. You know, then you get a chance to do a little bit more training here and there, like that's okay, but you need to think about how does this...
priority fit into my season. Do you absolutely need to do the strength training or would it be better to do a long ride and maybe some threshold work instead? Yeah. Yeah. I think that that's a really good point. At the end of the day,
you're still not competing in powerlifting or Olympic weightlifting or strongman or something like that. You are still a cyclist. And so even for people who love the gym, like I like, I love going to the gym and you meet a lot of people, especially if you're a more sprintery type, like, oh yeah, the gym is really fun and all this stuff. Uh, that's still not your, it's not your primary sport. So, yeah. Yeah. And a lot of the times, uh,
I think even the people I coach where I've had them in the gym for several winters in a row, still a lot of the time in the spring, they don't want to get out of the gym. And I have to tear them out of the gym because it's time to focus all of your recovery ability on the aerobic stuff.
and focus more of your training on the aerobic stuff rather than staying in the gym and they're afraid of, oh, I'm going to lose all my strength adaptation. Honestly, if you're eating enough protein and you're accessing that muscle mass regularly, like sprinting and stuff like that, you're going to do fine as long as your diet's on point too. Yeah. I would say that's...
You run into this a lot with people who just did an FTP block as well, right? They say, oh, I just did this FTP block. My FTP is this lifetime high. If I switch to some other block for VO2s or go back to base or what have you, am I going to lose all of my FTP gains? And you're like, no, relax. Unless your other plan is to just sit on the couch and eat donuts, you're probably going to be fine.
that actually will detrain a little bit if you're not lifting super heavy, you're getting into the gym super frequently. It's just neural drive. It's just the patterning of these motor patterns that, well, Department of Redundancy Department. But that's exactly what it is, is you can kind of lose it. And that's why, like, for instance, whenever I split...
a squat and a deadlift for somebody, like a squat on day one of the training week in the gym, deadlift on day two, sometimes if it's somebody like you or me, I know we don't quite need the maintenance, but somebody like me, well, we don't need the maintenance on the deadlift typically, but somebody like me, I know I need the maintenance on a squat because if I go seven days without even performing light squats, I'll kind of start to lose that and I won't feel quite as strong.
and so getting a little bit in can really help. Yeah I think this is like you can think of it as almost any other skill or technique based sport or activity even though it doesn't seem like standing up and sitting down at the barbell has that much technique and certainly for squats and deadlifts they're not as complicated as other things you could potentially be doing but there is some sort of skill and both
improvement of skill and then also decay of skill that goes along with it, just like throwing a ball or swinging a golf club or something like that. Yeah. And actually, I would say that there's more technique involved in lifting well than there is in riding a bike well. And I know that's going to be heretical to some people who think that riding a bike is very technique based. And as somebody who's done a lot of both, I'm going to strongly disagree. Didn't some of those studies, though, come out and say that
Especially for pedaling, thinking about pedaling in circles doesn't really matter. You just have to get your other leg out of the way of the leg that's pushing. Yeah, you've got to make sure it's not absorbing the force that your other leg is putting out. Which is why when you look at, if you've got Asiomas or something like that, you can load it into WKO5 and you can look at gross power released and gross power absorbed.
You're like, how much am I slowing myself down? Great. Yeah. Well, literally, yeah. Okay. So anyway, so that's the kind of deloading and kind of maintenance stuff. I know it's not great list of bullet points, do this, do that. A lot of it really is trial and error. And for somebody, if you're naturally strong, you may not need to do much in the gym.
If anything, you may just be fine without it. That's one of the things that I do with some of my sprinters is, you know, if we can get into the gym for a little bit, that's cool. Otherwise, it's really like the lowest priority. Yeah. But to sort of summarize the plan we roughly laid out, that's a couple weeks of adaptation of getting back into lifting, working on technique.
Three to four weeks of hypertrophy, higher reps, a little bit higher reps, not necessarily extreme, like 50 rep sets or drop sets or things like that. And then three to four weeks of strength. And then you're looking at getting into maintenance phase. And the other thing is, one thing I think is fun is that throughout this time, every once in a while, maybe once a week, once every other week, throw in a couple
like five second or 10 second all out sprints on the bike. Not so many that you're exhausted, but a couple of them just so maybe you can see hints of your lifting actually generating some performance improvements on the bike. And that's just sort of fun because otherwise it might be a little bit disconnected between, oh, I'm doing this stuff in the gym, but how, how exactly is it making me better?
On the bike? Yeah, although you want to make sure that you're kind of recovered and fresh for that kind of thing. Otherwise, if you're still tired from lifting, it's going to show no improvements, and that might be very discouraging. Yeah, that's true. But it is always kind of fun to see that number like...
you know tick up a little bit even if it might be within the error of your power meter like hey last week it said 1345 and this week it says 1370 even though that might be power meter error I'm gonna call that a win or whatever what have you I would call that a win for sure if it's two watts then it's like all right all right so let's get into
The more specific type stuff. So if you want to keep lifting, if that's part of your plan, if you want to either try to further improve your sprint or anaerobic capacity or just make your muscles bigger for vanity's sake, I mean, hey, why not? Or if you want to lift just to lift big numbers and just say that you can, it's kind of what my...
My life these days. Actually, I can't lift as much as Kyle, so I have no ground to stand on here. I have nobody to brag to. So the next phase, I would say, is the more single-like specificity phase. So if we've built up some muscle mass and some technique here, some neural adaptations, and then we've gone into the strength phase and now we've gained a good amount of strength. Let's say you've put on...
20 to 40 pounds onto your squat and your single leg squat, you've also gained some loading there doing sets of four, five, six, whatever. Now it's time to think about how do we specifically in the gym do lifting to have really good bike transfer. And I would say that the next phase, and this is by the way, completely
found by me in terms of just experience. And I've never seen any literature on periodization for this kind of stuff. So if somebody else has different ideas and it works, that's cool. I'm not saying this is... I'll change my mind again next year with this stuff too. A lot of my athletes are like, how come the program is different from last year? It's like, well, I learned stuff.
So the next phase I would say would be neural drive and single leg specificity, which means instead of doing squats first, like I think we had recommended previously, now you're going to switch it up. And one day I would suggest that you do a single leg squat as your first exercise, but you've got to make sure that you warm up really well. Your adductors can face a lot of load on this and your small glutes can face a lot of load with this kind of stuff. So warm up really well.
And the other day I would say you want to start with a deadlift, which is a great neural drive lift because there is literally no eccentric or like springy type contraction in our muscles when we do that kind of stuff. It's all just, oh, I have to recruit a lot of muscle mass right now. Yeah. And that could be either a trap bar, hex bar deadlift or a conventional deadlift or a...
A sumo deadlift, but I think that's maybe the least common one. Although maybe not. Maybe we have a lot of sumo deadlifters in our audience. Oh, maybe. I mean, and this actually gets to what are you working on, like quads versus glutes, because a sumo deadlift is very, very hip-oriented, and a trap bar deadlift, depending on how you sit into the bar, can be a lot more hip-oriented or can be a lot more quad-oriented.
And in my experience, doing a little more quad-oriented stuff is better. And anybody who says that all the power in the cycling stroke comes from the glutes, that's demonstrably incorrect. So just do a little Googling and you will find that that is not true. Although it can help to have a good connection with your glutes through deadlifts and maybe head thrusts and stuff like that as an accessory to deadlifts. It may not be, you know what I'm trying to say.
Yeah, one of the things that people will though, if you do have, some people like to do sumo deadlifts instead of conventional deadlifts, especially if they have back troubles. I think there's a video on Instagram that Callum Skinner posted who was a GB sprinter who did have a history of back problems and he would
basically never deadlift, and the only time he would occasionally deadlift, they would have him do sumo stuff. Yeah, well, that makes sense. Yeah, because even a trap bar deadlift can put a lot of strain on your back, but a straight bar deadlift, like, I can't straight bar deadlift as much as I can squat. That's how bad my back is at that extreme range of motion with that big moment arm on my lower back. You know, when I put the trap bar...
Trap bar, the load is a little more in the middle, and so you're a little more neutral. It's more like a squat in that way. And actually, speaking of which, if you don't have a trap bar or something like that, you can actually do a squat off the rack, off the safety arms of the rack, and that can actually be a really good alternative to a deadlift as well.
Yeah, those also can be incredibly unfun. Yeah, well not only can they be unfun, but they can also be ridiculous range of motion too. Like they could be basically quarter squats, because it gets harder and harder and harder to pick up the load.
purely concentrically as you get deeper and deeper into your squat. Actually, Kyle, didn't you see somebody yesterday wearing like a full range of motion shirt or something like that, doing like quarter squats? Yeah, yeah, at my gym. It was, the shirt said, the shirt, it must be from some company or one of these places, but it said something about like, oh, it said something like building superior posteriors. And I totally, I,
endorse that message. That's a great message. I agree. Quarter squats may not be the way to do it though. No, definitely not. The one thing is I find with the rack squats though that whereas the trap bar you can usually walk up and kind of get the weight set and know that it's well balanced over your foot. I find with the squats from the bottom off of the rack to
require a little bit more trial and error as to where you got to get the bar and then, okay, look down and make sure your feet are there because with a trap bar, you can sit down and you can kind of wiggle the bar around and roll it around or with any bar that's on the floor, you can wiggle it around and adjust your body and the bar. Whereas if it's sitting on the pins like that, you don't have that freedom. And so it can take you a little bit more trial and error to figure out.
Where you gotta put your body. Yeah. Well, and the trap bar is nice, especially when you use the high handles, which I recommend for anybody who's taller than about 5'2 or something like that. That doesn't get the internet likes. The internet likes the low handles for everything. Well, the low handles are fine, but honestly, I find a lot of people...
have the same problems with the low handle trap bar as they do with the straight bar deadlift in terms of like you can't quite get into the right position. Your back's a little rounded and it's not quite right. But anyway, so using the high handles on the trap bar is actually really nice because it balances itself. When you pull up, if you're not using the high handles, if you just have like just bars, my old trap bar actually was like this. It didn't have any high handles.
If my hands weren't exactly in the middle, it would tilt forward or backwards. And if you've got 500 pounds in your hands and it's tilting forwards, you don't want to hold it that long. And so if you've got the high handles, even if you're just a little off, it balances itself a lot better. And so it's a little more stable. And you're right that the rack squats do take a bit of trial and error. And also like the rack might not be, you know, like the typical two inch spacing on a rack.
Which is like, what's that? Like 5.02 centimeters or something like that? Yeah, it's 5.05, yeah. Close enough. Yeah, it's...
It may not be exactly in the right depth for where you need or want to work. And so there are various ways to try to adjust that with like pads under your feet and stuff like that. But, you know, that can also be another challenging aspect of that kind of thing. So anyway, so this phase, as we got sidetracked from, as is our way, is about single leg neural drive. So single leg squats to start.
and making sure they're working heavy in the heavy range, not in the one to two rep range, but four to six as usual, and then doing some accessories after that on one day and then trap bar the other day. And this I find is actually a really good way to get the neural drive and the proper single leg specificity because for the other phases, I typically have people do the bilateral stuff first and then single leg second.
and by the time you get to your single leg stuff, you're tired. Kyle, you actually just switched phases yesterday to this next phase. So how was your single leg experience doing that first rather than second? It was a little surprising because I was like, I went in and I knew that I should add a little bit more weight. And so I had done, the week before, I had done...
had sets of six single leg squats with 275. And so I was like, okay, if I'm going to do this first, I'm going to go up to 285. And that initially was going to make me a little nervous. And so it definitely took, like the first set, I think I was much less confident that I was going to be able to do it. And so it went way worse. But then after I got the first set and I was like, oh yeah, this is going to be fine. And so I did.
Three sets of five with 285. But then to do regular squats afterward, I was like, okay, I'm not going to do a ton of extra squat work to warm up because I'm already pretty warmed up. I actually just grabbed the 285, did a couple easy squats, like, all right, now I'm going to do 375 for five as my intermediate two sets of five or whatever.
And the first couple reps, I was like, oh, I'm tired. You get to the bottom, and then you're like, oh, okay, I'm going to make it, but this feels heavier than I am used to, and that's because I was already tired, and normally I've been doing squats first, and so I think it messed with your psyche and my confidence a little bit going into the lifting, but after getting that first set or two under my belt, I was like, okay, this is definitely doable, no problem.
I think one of the benefits of doing them first, as long as your technique is really good, single leg press or whatever single leg exercise you're doing is fine, by the way. Doing them first is, it helps a lot. And I find that typically there's two or three weeks of really easy strength gains to be made here as well that should transfer pretty easily to the bike because I find that the single leg squat strength
goes to the bike way much more than bilateral squat strength, where there's that noob gains phase, which I guess includes noob transfer of strength phase, and then it taps out. Yeah. Yeah, that makes sense. And I think if you, for the people who have really looked into...
a little maybe more veterans who have looked into a lot of track sprint specific work are probably familiar with the very very old website at this point up up up where it was written by this Australian coach and it's very old school in a lot of its approach to things but one of the things that it did have
was a short article written by the guy who was the strength coach for the Australian national team for like the early mid-2000s. And in it, they talked about this exact thing where he had two different athletes where one of them was able to leg press like 200 kilograms more or back squat like 100 kilograms more than the other one, but they were only like 10 or 20 kilograms apart in what they could single leg leg press.
and their flying 200 times are comparable. Yeah. So even though one of them was, you know, squatting 250 kilograms versus only squatting 200 kilograms or something like that, where you're like, wow, that seems like that would make a huge difference. Their single leg leg strength was so close that they were very close racing. Yeah. And, you know, we kind of mentioned the bilateral deficit in the sets and reps podcast, but this is one of the things where in this phase, well, the last phase.
can start to address it with the single leg strength relative to the bilateral strength. But let's go over that again real quick. It's like when you are, if we just take sets of five, like what can you do sets of five single leg versus what can you do sets of five with two legs? You might expect it to be 50-50, like you can just double what you can do on one leg as opposed to two, but that's not the case. So the bilateral deficit is
And I have no idea how the scientific literature usually measures this because I haven't delved into this in a little while because it's just been this phenomenon everybody knows about. So I think about it in terms of like what is your single leg strength relative to your two leg strength in a similar rep range. And so for you and me, it's like 75%. But so this phase is where I typically would want to do the most addressing of a...
of single leg strength. If I think that if somebody is at 55 or 60%, I would want to, I would go, okay, now this person has a lot of improvements they can make easily. And I'm going to go right for this. We're going to go right for the jugular here. If they're already strong and their single leg isn't strong enough relative to the two legs.
I see easy improvements to be made. So this would be a phase where if you're already strong, you're already lifting, I would go right to something like this if you really want to improve your sprint or improve your strength on the bike or whatever you're looking for. Yeah. It's also a good way if you know that you have a bad leg, this is also one way you can ensure that they can be equal or...
get closer to equal, maybe not perfectly equaled out, but they can get closer to being equal. Yeah. And this is also where if you're doing single leg stuff, you, well, at all times, I usually want to work my weak leg first. And for a little while with my hip problems, I, my left leg was significantly weaker than my right. And so I would, I would start with that. But now what's funny is like, cause I'm actually left leg dominant and I'm right-handed. I don't know how that works. I've got a wire cross somewhere.
My left leg is stronger than my right, so I always start my single leg squats with my right leg now. Yeah, I've been doing them with my right leg first because that's the one I'm missing a PCL in, so I always figure that that's going to be the one that's probably going to tire out. Even though I'm right leg dominant, I've been doing that just because that's going to be the one that's going to get more tired quicker, and it's probably going to be because of stabilization issues and not because of just...
Yeah, that's what I would suggest had you and I ever discussed it, but I know you're experienced enough that it doesn't need to be said, like, I know you're going to do the right thing for that. Because I would have said, yeah, do the injured leg first, because you're going to be fresher and it's not going to be as, you're not going to have that, like, fatigue imbalance or, you know, less balance or whatever I'm trying to say. Yeah, I think the other thing is, this is hopefully where I mentioned it a little bit earlier, oh,
Play around with some sprints while you're lifting and see some numbers go up. Here is hopefully where those numbers go up a lot more and that if you are also tracking Pmax or five second power or something in WKO5 or Training Peaks or Golden Cheetah or one of these things, that if you are tracking it over these months of lifting, now hopefully you'll really be able to cash in on all of that time in the gym.
Yeah, and also now let's talk about this phase relative to being on the bike. Because this is one of those things where you would get into this phase if you're a sprinter like us, like just on the track, this is all we do. Or you would get into this phase if you are really looking to improve your sprint on the bike. And typically, if you're doing aerobic training, at this point, you're going to really want to be into your aerobic training. So I had mentioned doing two days before.
But for most people, doing one day in the gym with this would probably be the way to go. So you have enough energy on the bike to do all the other stuff you got to do. And so I would do single leg first, then I would do trap bar deadlift, and then maybe a third accessory exercise and possibly something explosive. So that would be what I would recommend at this phase. Yeah, that makes sense. And also, accessory work, note that...
I think a lot of people are going to say, oh, I need to work on my hamstrings because I am a cyclist and I'm very quad and glute dominant. So then I have to just also just try to murder my hamstrings or things like that is going to be a bad plan. Like you can obviously do hamstring accessory work, but you should not, even though you are not going to be using your hamstring as much when you're actually pedaling a bike, trying to hammer them to the same degree that you are hammering.
say your prime movers for cycling means that you're just going to recover that little bit slower from your gym days. Yeah. So hamstring work, great. Trying to do, I don't know, maximal sets of heavy good mornings or stiff leg deadlifts, maybe skip those. Yeah. Yeah. Keep it light. Keep it fun. Keep it. Yeah. Accessory work. I don't think we've touched on this yet, really. It's usually like 10 to 15 reps, somewhere in the
4 to 6 RPE range, something like that. Yeah. And that's going to be one of the things where that you may not have to periodize as much because it's just not going to be generating as much fatigue. If you're only going to an RPE 5 every time, you're not murdering yourself. Unless you're trying to get some sweet Ronnie Coleman hamstrings.
Oh man. I would love to have those hamstrings for sure. All right. So that's a typical phase that you would probably do in the gym while you are on the bike doing maybe threshold work. But once you really get into race prep and stuff like that, and you're going to be racing and you really want to be fresh and you want to hit some really good numbers and you want to feel really good on the bike.
This is probably where I would recommend really backing off the weights in the gym. Either you go to maintenance or you go into the very, very last phase that if you're a sprinter like us, we will do stuff like this. We'll get into just single leg activation and then we'll do something maybe explosive on single leg or explosive on two legs. Like we'll do hand clean pulls or we'll do, you know.
Sled throws with single legs, stuff like that, as opposed to making sure that we're nice and fresh on the bike, but really this is just putting the finishing touches on your sprint or what have you. Yeah. This is the way to do openers in the gym for your bike work effectively. Yeah. Also, someone may also at this time, now that you mentioned
something slightly more dynamic, ask, what about plyometrics? What about box jumps? So what do you think about those in terms of being useful for cycling? Oh, they're not. No, I'm just kidding. You know, this is one of those things where the noob gains thing with plyometrics can be great, but...
For the most part, unless you're a runner or you've done a field sport or something like that, plyometrics will typically stiffen your muscles and your tendons a lot. And it doesn't really matter that much. I know people who will go do box jumps as their explosive gym exercise and some light press or whatever else and hoping to improve their sprint and they don't see...
Those improvements. And if you do, typically that's more noob gain stuff. But for more advanced athletes, I find that plyometrics can be great for joint health. And if that's the case, I would recommend jump rope. That is a great low-impact plyometric that will help you with bone density and whatnot.
But when it comes to typical plyos, they're usually pretty hard and you got to build up to them slowly over a very long period of time. And just frankly, most of the time I consider that's just juice that's not worth the squeeze for most cyclists. Yeah. I think my, coming from having done plyos in like team sports for high school, football, track, things like that, what always...
what I saw a lot of and what now makes me nervous about plyos is people who are new to them maybe selecting a box that's a little bit too tall and then just destroying their shin on a box when they're tired and they don't make that last jump and I saw this happen enough in high school where it makes me a little bit nervous obviously if you just select that box that's a couple inches shorter that you know that you can get onto but still provides that motivation to push hard that's one thing but there's that
There's that additional risk of if you don't make it, what do you do? Well, that's one of the reasons I never assign box jumps to anybody ever. Fair. I've done it myself a couple times. I've tried it. I've tried things like drop jumps. Those are hard, especially when you get to weigh in as much as I do. I wouldn't even want to do it 20 pounds lighter.
Dropjumps. Everyone wants to be Gunthor. Shout out to whoever that I forget. Sorry, I'm forgetting who you are on our fellow discord who was also talking about Werner Gunthor. Oh, yeah. Well, yeah, that massive guy who was probably helped out by more than one Soviet sports supplement. Yes. For the uninitiated, he is a former Swiss.
international level shot putter who at his peak was like 6'7 and like 300 pounds but there are these amazing training videos of him from the 80s and 90s where he's got this glorious mustache and this mullet and all of the appropriate late 80s early 90s like track and field clothing to go with it but he's doing these just absolutely mind-blowing leaps and bounding exercises some of them are weighted some of it is like he'll do
a set of five heavy squats with like 200 kilograms and then immediately drop the bar and jump into like bounding one foot over hurdles and stuff like this. It's crazy. Yeah. Well, yeah, like contrast training and that kind of stuff can be effective. But the question is, are you applying it appropriately? Like I know a lot of people who will do.
a heavy squat or a heavy deadlift, and they'll hop on the bike and do a sprint. And that kind of stuff can be fine for cyclists because you are getting on a bike. But a lot of the time, you're not jumping with two legs. You're not doing this. You're not? Well, a lot of the time, the load is too light is one of the issues. And so if we look for like...
There's this trope in science over what makes the most power, like what load on a bar or against your muscles or whatever or what have you, where do you make the most power? And a lot of places will say like 30% one rep max or 50% or something like that. And recent science in weightlifters, Olympic weightlifters, has...
shown that they make the most power at like 90% one rep max. Yeah. But that's because they're sport, right? Yeah. That is a common percentage of what an Olympic weightlifter can clean as a percentage of their one rep max front squat, for example. Well, here's the thing, though, is that for them, they have longer impulse times on the ground.
and they achieve great efficiency of movement and they're adapted to these specific things. Like they can recruit a huge amount of their muscle mass to make large amounts of power in that timeframe, which compared to running on a track like Usain Bolt or Tyson Gay, this is going to be an eternity of time comparatively.
Oh, totally. Yeah. And so these are some of the things that we need to think about when we're thinking about should we do plyometrics? Because plyometrics, one of the things that you are usually thinking about is reducing contact time, making it as quick and explosive as possible. But the question is, does this transfer to the bike? And, you know, noob gains, yes. But after you need some specificity, the answer, in my opinion, is no. Yeah. I think actually...
That one podcast that Medi Cordy was on, he mentions this, that one of the nice things about cycling is that you are not restricted to a very, very limited range of effectively contact times like you are in running where you get to pick your gearing, right? Like you get to pick within some much broader range than if you are sprinting the 100 meters what your time to apply force is. Obviously, you cannot choose.
or you likely should not or would not be able to choose something like a 100-tooth chain ring in the front or something ridiculous. But within reason, you have a fairly broad range of times to choose. You're probably not going to try to pick 40 RPM for your peak sprint cadence and you're probably not going to pick 200 RPM but somewhere in between.
Yeah. Well, and that's one of the interesting things though, isn't it? Is because that means that we can individualize these things to an individual's physiology and we can try to improve the physiology in certain ways because we know that they're going to go faster. But at a certain point, there are certain aspects of physiology that can no longer be trained. Like nervous system is one of those things that has a really hard time being trained.
How long did you and I spend for a couple months of one year trying to do all super fast leg speed type stuff to see if we could get that aspect of our physiology better? It went a little better, but there was a point of diminishing returns. Then after that, there was a point of no returns.
Yeah, yeah, and I think it's fairly old school to think that everyone has to fit in this one mold, that you have to be a sprinter and your Pmax has to be at 140 RPMs, something like that, or you have to, in order to do a pursuit, you have to do it at 125 RPMs or what have you. And so hopefully people are moving past that and then using the weights to help them move past that. Yeah, actually, that's one of the things I really appreciated about Dan Bigham's book. Shout out to Dan Bigham, who is definitely not listening.
But Dan, if you are Yeah, if you are, I'd love to have you on the podcast. I'll just email him. Maybe he'll come on. I think in that book, he talks about how the old school way to approach a pursuit was, oh, you have to do it at this cadence, et cetera, et cetera. And he was like, why?
And if you don't make the most power at that cadence, why would you do it there? If you make the most power at like 95 RPM in a pursuit, why don't you try to do that? And if that means you need a little more strength to get to work the gear up in the start, okay, go to the gym. That's something that can be worked on easily. But if you're looking at somebody making more power at...
140 RPM, just because you think they have to spin 140 RPM going down the back straight and a flying 200, that's kind of one of those old school things that we can turn on its head if we want and individualize these things to the athlete and to the athlete's physiology. Yeah. So anyway, have we beat this to death or should we tangent some more? I think so. I mean...
That at least gives you some glimpse into why you would be really, really honing in on the specificity for these things. You wouldn't just be like, oh, I just want to generally get stronger. Oh, I just want to see some more sprint or some more anaerobic capacity. You'd also potentially be looking at things like cadence and working on these much smaller aspects of, oh, maybe I need a better start or, oh, I have to...
And my A race this year is going to have, I don't know, a downhill sprint finish. So I need a 54 or 55 tooth chainring on my road bike. And we got to work on that because I want to win this state championship or something like that. Yeah. All right. So...
We kind of have a roadmap for the rest of these strength episodes on 10-Minute Tips, and then we'll move into some other stuff. But if there's anything specific that you want to hear us talk about, either email me, tag us on Instagram, or comment on the Instagram post that's announcing this episode. It might go up on, I don't know, Thursday or Friday or something like that of the week of the 20.
Today's the 23rd, so this week-ish. So whenever you hear this, if you have some ideas of what you want us to go into for strength training, because we can ramble for an hour about anything, obviously, let us know. And I was also thinking about doing like an eyeball FTP thing for people if they want. This is going to be hard because the resolution on a lot of PD curves is not great.
If you want to try it, tag me on Instagram at Empirical Cycling in your power curve and show as much detail in the 15 to 80 minute range as possible. Let me get a good sense of scale and I will eyeball your FTP and try to tell you what it is and we'll see if we can agree on a number or not. Who knows? Yeah.
I think that'll be fun for people. I think people are often interested in that. Like, oh, I have the software now. How do I use it? How do I actually read this curve? Other than just, I like to pick out the big numbers because they make me feel good. Yeah. Well, I mean, I did that in the Velo Discord the other day. And somebody was like, how'd you do that? I was like, well, once you get an eye for it, it's not that hard. But I've also looked at...
Way more power curves than a lot of people have. And I think a lot of people can get stuck in their power curves. And, you know, you're too invested in the data. And I think I can look at it a little more objectively. But I just want you to eyeball whatever the big number is. Big numbers. All right. In that case, my FTP is 2000 watts.
420.69 perfect all right um okay that's definitely the cue to end this show so uh thanks everybody for listening uh email me at empiricalcycling at gmail.com if you have any coaching and consultation inquiries again we're always taking on athletes and if you want to meet uh you know if you want a second opinion on your training plan or what you're planning to train on uh we'll we won't write you a plan but we can definitely talk about how you might go about planning it for yourself
remember we're ad free so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate is where you can donate we'll do the Dan Carlin Hardcore History Bucket Show if that sounds amenable to folks we really appreciate that it does go a long way we've got probably no show notes up on the website unless I want to put up a picture of Ronnie Coleman maybe I'll do that and add empiricalcycling on Instagram as usual and as always thanks for listening and we'll see you next time see everyone